.. _gravity_introduction:

Introduction
************

.. sidebar:: Gravity

    .. figure:: ./images/icon_grav.gif
    	:align: center

These pages introduce the fundamentals and practicalities of gravity
surveying. They are not exhaustive, and are meant only to serve as an
introduction.

Gravity Surveys
===============

For applications at engineering, exploration and regional or continental
geological scales, measurements of Earth's gravitational field are used to map
subsurface variations in density. For geological materials, density ranges
from nearly 0 kg/m\ :sup:`3`\  (for voids or snow, dust and similar materials)
to roughly 8000 kg/m\ :sup:`3`\  for some rare minerals. Most common
geological materials are between 1800 and 3200 kg/m\ :sup:`3`\.

.. figure:: ./images/grav_photo.jpg
    :align: right

The basis of using variations in gravitational acceleration as a measure of
density variations is that the force of attraction between two masses is
directly proportional to the two masses, and inversely proportional to the
square of the distance between them. If the force of attraction experienced by
a fixed mass can be measured carefully at different locations on the earth,
the change in this attraction can be related to variations in the mass of
materials nearby (i.e. underground). There are other aspects of this
experiment that affect the force of attraction experienced by our fixed mass,
but these effects can be determined and removed so that the residual
variations can be related to the subsurface distribution of density.

Historical perspective
======================

The universal law of gravitation has been known since 17\ :sup:`th`\  century,
when it was founded by Newton. Therefore, investigations of Earth's
gravitation could be considered one of the oldest of geophysical pursuits. In
1735-1745, Pierre Bouguer established relations describing how gravitational
attraction varies according to latitude, altitude, and topography. Only
somewhat more recently, the effects on Earth's gravitational field of large
topographic features were recognized as significant when British surveyors in
India, who were using plumb-bobs for vertical references, encountered
significant errors near the Himalaya mountains.

The first exploration applications involved detection of salt domes associated
with petroleum resources, using pendulum instruments in the Texas oil patch in
the 1920's. The fundamental sensors used by current portable instruments were
developed in the 1930's and modern ground-based portable systems really only
improve on these techniques by automating some of the measurement steps.

There have been three important recent innovations that are changing the
extent to which gravity is used in earth sciences. These are the detailing of
the earth's (and other planet's) shape using satellite orbital paths, the
development of reliable airborne gravity measurement techniques, and the
acquisition of high accuracy measured (as opposed to calculated) gravity
gradients.
