.. _induced_polarization_introduction:

Introduction
************

Chargeability is a physical property that is related to resistivity. The
module about DC resistivity shows that potentials measured in a DC resistivity
survey can be related to charges that accumulate when current is made to flow.
However, when the transmitter current is switched off, the measured voltage
may take up to several seconds to reach zero. Similarly, when the current is
switched on, there may be a finite time taken for the voltage to reach a
steady state value. In other words, current injected into the ground causes
some materials to become polarized. The phenomenon is called induced
polarization, and the physical property that is measured is usually called
chargeability, which quantifies the material's capacity to retain charges
after a forcing current is removed. The following figure illustrates the
measurable effect.

.. figure:: ./images/IP_source.gif
	:align: center
	:scale: 100 %


Induced polarization can also be measured using low frequency sinusoidal
signals, as discussed in the "Measurements and data" section of this chapter.
The signals or data that are measured depend upon which of the various types
of source signals are used. Note that IP surveys always include resistivity
measurements because the electrical resistivity of the earth must be known in
order to invert data to recover chargeability.



The physical property--chargeability
====================================

The materials that are most chargeable include sulfide minerals (both massive
and disseminated), clay-rich materials, and graphite. However, the
chargeablility of materials can have a wide range within the same geographic
region. This is because chargeability depends upon many factors, including
mineral type, grain size, the ratio of internal surface area to volume, the
properties of electrolytes in pore space, and the physics of interaction
between surfaces and fluids.

Interpretation of chargeabililty models is further complicated by the fact
that there is no standard set of units for this physical property. There are
at least three ways of measuring the phenomenon and models recovered by
inversion generally take on the same units as the measurement. This could be
milli-seconds if measurements are made of the ground's response to impulsive
sources. The units could also be percent if the response at two or more source
signal frequencies is compared, or units of milliradians may be used if the
phase difference between source and received signals is recorded.

Typical problems where chargeability is useful
==============================================


Mineral exploration for sulfides (disseminated and massive) is unquestionably
the most common application of IP because those types of ore minerals are
often chargeable.There are also applications in hydrogeology. For example,
mapping salt water intrusions in aquifers that include clayey layers may be
difficult using resistivity alone. However, the increased chargeability
associated with clay may help differentiate between zones with more saline
water and clay, both of which have low resistivity. In addition, there is a
growing interest in the possibility of using chargeability to aid in the
detection and delineation of contaminants in the ground. There has also been
some effort to apply IP to oil and gas exploration.
